[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: The
hurtful experiences we all
go through or not done
and over with just
because we think we've
processed the emotions.
Those traumas remain hidden in
our body and nervous system,
ultimately becoming embedded
in our subconscious mind.
That is, if we don't release it.
David Berceli has been
assisting returning
soldiers to everyday
people release
their trauma through his
highly effective trauma release
process.
This is big.
This is a big deal this.
>>DAVID BERCELI: What
really is true about trauma
is that every living species on
the planet experiences trauma.
So that could be plants going
through droughts or floods,
animals going through all
sorts of types of traumas.
And humans go through traumas.
But I think we have had
it speed up, particularly
to the human species.
Because the intensity
with which we
live life now and the
intensity of communications
that we have-- so that we
are vicariously experiencing
traumas all over the world, by
the plane crashes we just had,
earthquakes,
tsunamis that we see.
We are vicariously experiencing
it through the television.
And so, you have to accept
that our species has
a larger than
previously experienced
trauma experience
in their lives.
So then, the question
becomes, how do we
deal with this in reality?
>>REGINA: Yes,
and not only that.
I mean, we're responsible
for exposing ourselves
to a lot of it.
That's our responsibility.
>>BERCELI: Right.
>>REGINA: And in
fact, yesterday I
was having this conversation
about having access
to online programming.
People are now more
binge watching.
And we tend to be addicted
to the really dramatic types
of programs that have a lot
of trauma embedded in them.
>>BERCELI: Right.
>>REGINA: And so, you get
done dosing yourself on four
episodes of something really
traumatic, like, "Homeland"
or something--
>>BERCELI: Addiction
is the perfect word.
Because we keep seeking it.
Because it gives
us an adrenal rush.
And that make us feel alive
and excited and more excited
and more alive.
But then, we actually
have an adrenal overload,
where we become so
addicted that we
can't stop watching these things
that cause us to be highly
aroused in our nervous systems.
And so, we are in
fact a species that is
capable of traumatizing itself.
Different from animals
that only experience
trauma when another
animal is chasing them.
Other than that, they
lay around and eat
and feel happy and glad.
We actually seek out
trauma-inducing behaviors.
>>REGINA: It's so unhealthy!
>>BERCELI: Well,
we hear about it.
I get an adrenaline rush!
It feels great!
It makes me feel alive!
The question is, why
can't we feel alive
without a high adrenaline rush?
>>REGINA: That is a
very good question.
I hope we're going to
get the answer to that.
But first, I want
to start with you
and just getting
into your background.
>>BERCELI: Sure.
>>REGINA: Because
you've lived, you
have worked all over the world.
And just give us a background.
I mean, Palestine,
Lebanon, Northern Ireland--
you went into all the
really war torn areas
with extremely high
levels of trauma.
>>BERCELI: Yeah.
I happened to be working with
a nonprofit organization, which
was Maryknoll.
It was a Catholic
relief foundation
that I was working with.
And my job was to be in the
Middle East at the time.
I studied Arabic.
I'm fluent in it still.
And I was to study
the Arab culture
and figure out, how
do you live in it?
How do you dialogue with Islam?
--and all that sort of thing.
In that process, I lived in
countries that were at war.
And there was tremendous
amount of violence there.
And after I left
those countries,
I ended up in other
countries that
also had a tremendous amount
of either violence, poverty,
or some type of traumatic
experience in these countries.
And so, I saw millions
of traumatized people.
And that shattered, if
you will, my paradigm of,
how does somebody
recover from trauma?
What is trauma?
How do we deal with it as a
large population of people?
--rather than just an
individual being traumatized
and doing personal counseling.
>>REGINA: So did you notice
that cultures-- I mean,
I just find this fascinating
on a personal level--
that each culture
deals with their trauma
in a different way?
And can you tell
us what that looks
like in the Middle East compared
to, say, Northern Ireland
or America?
Give us some examples of how we
each deal with it collectively.
>>BERCELI: Well,
collectively-- there
is such a thing as
cultural trauma,
trans-generational
trauma, societal trauma.
When we hear of a
school shooting here
in the United States, that
can be a societal trauma.
We hear too many of
them and our society
feels like it's fracturing
and getting bad,
and we're having
difficult times.
So that's societal, cultural,
and trans-generational trauma.
Even in Europe, from
the Second World War,
you see children who are still
traumatized from their parents
being traumatized.
So here's what happens.
The trauma expression itself
manifests itself through,
usually, culturally
acceptable ways.
Meaning, you have a tremendous
amount of aggressive energy,
which is what the trauma does.
It builds up an
energetic charge.
But you're not allowed
to socially express it
by beating people up.
So you'll get it
through societal means
of some sort of domestic
violence or family abuse.
But the domestic violence
may look culturally different
in each country.
One country may use manipulation
and control of the children.
Another country will use
beating of the children.
Another country will
use distancing the child
from the family.
So we all find a way to
express that built-up energy.
But it gets fed
through the culture.
Because you wouldn't
find in Asia,
as an example, a
lot of people that
would be expressing some of
their traumas aggressively.
Because they have more of
a social consciousness.
But they may binge drink
and, then, become alcoholic
and be drunk every night.
Then, family violence comes
through the drunkenness.
But what they've done is
they've turned that behavior
in on themselves.
Soldiers do that a lot too.
They feel traumatized
when they come back
from Iraq and Afghanistan.
They don't want to express
that trauma to their family
members or their spouses.
And so, what they'll do
is they'll turn it inward.
And then, they withdraw
from the family.
Then, when the family member
tries to pull them back in,
the only way they
can be pulled back in
is with violent expression.
So they're either violently
expressing themselves
or completely withdrawn.
And that's a terrible
cycle to be stuck in.
>>REGINA: It seems like Russia
has had an issue for quite
a long time because
of whatever trauma
they went through,
through the wars
and also through the
political system itself.
So drinking seemed to be
prominent there and in some
of the northern climates.
>>BERCELI: Exactly right.
>>REGINA: What about
in the Arabic nations
where drinking is
actually even discouraged?
How does it show itself there?
>>BERCELI: Well
then, you can see it
through repression of
children, repression
of women, strict rules.
Religion is a really
difficult area to deal with.
And this isn't just for Islam.
It's for every religion.
But traumatized people
will take religion,
because it's
culturally acceptable.
And they'll express aggression
through religious "legalities,"
in a sense.
And so, you can find this.
We saw this in the Catholic
Church all the time.
And you can find it in a lot
of the Protestant churches,
non-denominational groups
that really have violence
as an expression of,
quote, "the love of God."
And that's a confusion.
And you have to ask,
why is that confused?
When someone can say,
Jesus hates you--
as an example-- well,
there's a conflict in that.
Because the message
of Jesus is love
and acceptance and tolerance
and all that sort of stuff.
But to say Jesus
would hate somebody
is a suggestion that there's
something else that's
going on underneath that.
And it's some type
of violent expression
that the person
can't socially feel
comfortable to directly say it.
So they need somebody
on their side
to justify that
expression of hatred.
And they'll use their religion.
This is very common
around the world.
>>REGINA: OK, so I'm just
taking it regionally.
What about South American
and Latin countries,
where people are known to have
more expressive personalities
or tempers?
How does it show there?
>>BERCELI: Yeah,
or they can have
a lot of social
violence going on there.
So let's take Brazil
as an example.
I was just there last month.
>>REGINA: I was just
thinking of that, yeah.
>>BERCELI: So you've got a
lot of expressive people,
beautiful culture, wonderful.
Tremendous, tremendous
poverty there.
And great diversity between the
extremely wealthy and extremely
poor, and very
small middle class--
much like you see happening in
the rest of the world as well.
But you have this tremendous
violence that goes on
and drug use that goes on inside
of these poverty-driven areas.
And then, you have this
completely wealthy group
that stay distant
from themselves
and have no social
connection to that.
So you see, right
in the society,
violence will manifest
itself through finances
or social structures, those
sorts of things-- inequities.
It almost always manifests
in some form of inequity,
whether it's men dominating
women, or rich dominating poor,
or politicians
dominating the economics.
Those are all expressions of
traumatic unresolved behavior
patterns.
>>REGINA: Let's take the US.
>>BERCELI: Yeah, we have
a perfect example of that.
We see our split also happening
between rich and poor.
Middle classes is really
distancing itself.
And then, we see
all this violence
that's going on in the
school systems and--
>>REGINA: Bizarre types--
>>BERCELI: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: --of expressions.
>>BERCELI: And so you see
these bizarre expression
starting to pop out.
But when you have a whole
population that's already
so hyperactive,
one expression will
give birth to
another expression,
and another, and another.
Because the culture is rich
for that to begin happening.
And one of the things I see
happening all the time too--
and we're seeing it a lot
and I feel sad about it--
but the whole question
about police violence
among the general population.
We already know--
this is unquestioned--
that the police are a
traumatized population as well.
And they can't help but be.
I'm not saying
they're bad people.
I believe they're
really good people.
But they're put in circumstances
where, basically, they're
saying, here, we're
going to put you
in a traumatizing profession.
We guarantee it's going
to traumatize you.
But we're not going
to give you any help
to actually work through
that in a healthy manner.
So police departments,
fire departments,
emergency medical
teams are being
traumatized professionally.
And yet, we still don't
insert consciously
some way of helping them to
deal with these traumatic
experiences they're having.
>>REGINA: It's true.
I had a friend who
was a beat cop.
And his partner was
shot and died in his arm
while they were
chasing someone down.
His girlfriend--
who was also a cop--
died just before
that in a car chase.
And her car crashed.
And this person
was so traumatized.
And at the time, I thought, wow!
What a disconnect.
But it really wasn't.
His self-medication was he would
take raspberry bubble baths.
>>BERCELI: Well,
that's wonderful.
I mean, it's healthy.
>>REGINA: You know, raspberry
bubble baths and eat sushi--
and had this, just, very
delicate personal life trying
to offset the trauma of--
>>BERCELI: Exactly right.
>>REGINA: --going
to work every day.
>>BERCELI: And that works too.
Because it's a way
of balancing it out.
Our problem is that
we're not supporting it.
And not only do we not support
policemen, firemen, EMTs,
soldiers, et cetera, they
actually get a check mark.
That if they said, I think
I'm traumatized, I need help
or I need counseling
or whatever,
that could be seen as bad.
And so therefore,
they don't report it.
Because then, they might not
get their next promotion.
So not only do we traumatize
them and not help them,
we actually build
in an impediment
to ensure they don't
seek the help they need.
So we are the result of why
our police department is
being traumatized and
acting out violently
and why black populations are
traumatized and acting out
violently, even
white populations.
>>REGINA: It makes sense.
>>BERCELI: The whole thing
is a trauma-driven culture.
>>REGINA: It is.
Now OK, we haven't
gotten to the Canadians.
I'm assuming, what?
Molson?
Is Molson the trauma control?
>>BERCELI: Right.
But see, it's literally
all over the world.
And so, we could say that we
could see expressions of this
everywhere.
If you understand
the primary thing,
why would someone
act out in a behavior
that would be violent
against the society itself?
There has to be something
that's inducing that behavior.
And when it does it
on a societal level
or mass cultural level--
bombings of schools
and hospitals or
whatever we're bombing--
you have to ask yourself,
what's giving rise
to the human species being
so violent towards itself?
And that has to be some type
of trauma-induced behavior
that's expressing itself
through social structures.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
And so, get before we get
further into your story--
because I love your
story personally.
I mean, you were a monk.
But let's talk about the
notion of medicating oneself
through video games.
Because this is now
a global phenomena.
And a lot of those games
are just ratcheting
up the same chemicals
in the brain further.
>>BERCELI: Right.
>>REGINA: Right?
>>BERCELI: Yeah,
what's happening--
and obviously, they don't
want a lot of research
on this to really talk about it.
But yes, there's
clear evidence already
that suggests all these violent
games, these video games
that children grow up playing,
actually begin to hyperarouse
their nervous system.
And so, they live in that state.
At a certain point,
what it does is
it drives them into a state
of what we call dissociation.
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm.
Desensitization, yeah.
>>BERCELI: Desensitization,
exactly right.
And so then, they go
from being desensitized
to being highly aroused,
to being desensitized
to being highly aroused.
And they've actually
lost almost any place
in the middle of where
they just sit calmly,
they can enjoy
relaxing and breathing.
It's one of the things that
we keep seeing in our culture.
Now what we see,
people are now saying,
I want to go back to
living closer to the land,
living closer to a
natural lifestyle.
I want to get off the grid.
What's that an expression of?
It's an expression of,
I'm either desensitized
or highly charged.
And the one thing
that can calm us down
is to get rid of all of that
stimulating information that's
being given to us.
And then, people say, wow, I
feel so much more in myself.
It's actually true, they do.
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm.
Did you suffer or
experience around you
people suffering from trauma?
Were you intrigued at that
when you were very young?
>>BERCELI: Well, I didn't
even know it when I was young.
My father was in the Korean War.
And he was a
traumatized soldier.
And trauma at the time
of my father's age
wasn't even well-known
within the society
and the medical community.
So my father was
traumatized and demonstrated
all the perfect examples.
He would drink as a way
of calming himself down.
Or he'd be really highly
aggressive towards us
as children.
Or he'd be distant.
He used to go out into his
garden or he'd go fix his car.
But it was his way
of distancing himself
when family involvement
and family relationship
got too intense and
he couldn't handle it.
So I basically had a father.
But my entire
generation had fathers
like that that only knew
how to either be distant
with the families or
maybe use alcohol-- that
was the drug of choice at the
time-- to actually anaesthetize
themselves from these high,
emotional experiences that they
would have.
So I grew up with that and never
knew it until I left my home.
But I realized, much
of my childhood--
I grew up mildly dissociated
from relationship.
Because relationships
were dangerous.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>BERCELI: See-- and my mother--
typical mother at that time--
protected the children
from the father.
She did everything
mothers should do.
But yet, she lived in
a highly nervous state.
>>REGINA: Because she was
nervous about your dad too.
>>BERCELI: Because she
was always frightened.
What's he going to do?
And are the children safe?
How do I help the
family stay together?
All those things.
So we had both of
those problems.
But that entire generation
had that problem.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
Yes, and that was just
following World War II.
So--
>>BERCELI: Right.
And so, you could see how we
are generationally traumatized
as well.
I grew up in a
frightening environment,
with parents who didn't know
how to handle their emotions.
Because they didn't even
know anything about them.
And so then, my
generation passes it
on to the next generation.
It's very common.
>>REGINA: Right.
So why did you ultimately
choose a path as a monk
and then, move on from
there into the work
as a social worker?
>>BERCELI: Well, it's
kind of interesting.
First of all, I actually was
in the Air Force for six years.
When I was in the Air Force,
I lived in Okinawa, Japan.
And it was my first experience
of living in another country.
And I loved it.
I loved everything about it.
I couldn't believe it.
Language and culture and food--
I thought it was amazing.
I didn't like the
military culture.
It just didn't fit me.
But I did like living overseas.
And so, I was actually
talking to the priest in Japan
and telling him this thing.
And he said, well you
should join this community.
Because they only work overseas.
So if you join them, you'll be
guaranteed to live overseas.
And I wasn't real
interested at the time.
But eventually, I
ended up joining
this religious community
called Maryknoll Missionaries.
And they sent me overseas.
Now, I really liked it.
Because I was living culturally.
And even, I was
studying the language.
And I went to the university
to study the culture.
And the richness-- it
was fascinating to me.
And it just happened
to be the Middle East.
I could have gone to many
countries around the world.
And so when I was
working there, I
realized I love trying
to understand people.
Because this cultural exchange
was making me curious.
Why did they think this way?
Why do they say that?
And why do they do this?
And that led me into, sort
of, social work background.
Because I didn't have
that until after I
had gotten my degree in
theology, and I was studying,
how do we believe spiritually?
Because I was basically
studying Islam and Christianity
at the time.
But then I realized--
when we were traumatized,
I thought, wow.
Trauma affected
our belief system.
Trauma affected our
psycho-emotional state.
And trauma affected our bodies.
And I was able to see all
three of those distinctly.
So this is an interesting thing.
When I came back from the
Middle East-- and I was really
traumatized.
I didn't realize how
traumatized I was.
But my religious community said,
what would you like to do next?
Because I said, I can't go
back to the Middle East.
It's too disturbing
for me right now.
I need to go somewhere else.
And they said, where
would you like to go?
I said, I need to
go to a hermitage.
I need to live alone.
And they were
gracious enough, they
let me live in a
hermitage for six months.
And it was fascinating.
>>REGINA: Where was this?
>>BERCELI: This was in
the Camaldolese Hermitage
in Big Sur, California.
>>REGINA: Oh yes, OK.
>>BERCELI: OK?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>BERCELI: So I lived there for
six months-- wonderful group
of people.
But what I discovered
was the intensity
of involvement and
activity that I
was engaged in while I was
living in Beirut, Lebanon
during the war.
The only thing that
could balance that
was the intensity of
solitude and silence.
They actually, in a sense,
complemented my human growth.
>>REGINA: Yes, that makes sense.
>>BERCELI: Yes.
>>REGINA: It's the pendulum
swinging into balance.
>>BERCELI: That's
exactly what it was.
And so, when I balanced it out
and went into that solitude
and silence, then I
was able come back out
and start putting together
pieces of, what happened to me?
And how would I help people
restore themselves who've
been in those same situations?
>>REGINA: Because you were there
during shellings and so forth.
>>BERCELI: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah.
>>REGINA: You were
in the thick of it.
>>BERCELI: Oh yeah, I lived
right in the middle of a lot
of bombings and shootings and--
>>REGINA: What is that like
every day as a civilian?
>>BERCELI: Well,
what was interesting
about it was that,
although I thought
I was dealing with it
daily-- and I thought, OK,
another bombing,
another shooting.
Duck.
Run underneath something.
Hide.
That sort of stuff.
What I didn't realize
was I basically
was living with that in my
head in the way of surviving.
But I completely split off
any emotional connection
to that at all.
So that's what we
would call clinically--
I disassociated from any
emotional state in my body.
And I basically was in my head.
I said, yes.
There's a bombing.
Here's what I do.
This is what I know how to do.
Once the bombings over, we sweep
things up or clean things up.
And we sit around and
wait for the next bombing
and hope we're not killed in it.
That was it.
It was sort of stupid
when you think about it.
But it seemed to be
real life at the time.
Everybody was doing it.
But I didn't realize till
afterwards all the emotions
that started to
surface from that,
the terror, the rage, the
hatred, all that sort of thing.
Its sadness and
fear all came out
after I left Lebanon and was
back in the United States.
That's when I had to
go into the Hermitage
to process what
it had done to me.
>>REGINA: And what's
interesting is
where you have
heavy trauma, that's
where social engineering
really comes in handy.
>>BERCELI: Yeah, very much so.
>>REGINA: That's when people
are highly programmable--
>>BERCELI: Yes.
>>REGINA: --when
they're not integrated
and they're fractured inside.
>>BERCELI: Right.
That's when it's easiest
to gather a group.
So if you're
traumatized by somebody
and your family has been
violated or victimized
in some way, it's
easy to get you
to fight against another group.
That's the best time
to catch you doing it.
Or it's easy to convince you
to follow me, to take my pill,
or to take my method or--
>>REGINA: Exactly,
indoctrination
into something radical.
>>BERCELI: Exactly right.
Exactly right.
Extreme religions will
do that all the time.
That's how they
seek out followers.
Find the people who
are traumatized who
are looking for
somebody to give them
guidance, safety, leadership,
and I'll follow you.
And they'll commit
themselves fully to that.
>>REGINA: And so, you
were at Maryknoll, right?
>>BERCELI: Right.
>>REGINA: Which is,
reportedly, kind of a CIA front
around the world too, OK?
>>BERCELI: [LAUGHS] Yes.
>>REGINA: And so, did you have
any interface with any of that?
I mean, were you recruited?
Or did you help-- were your
services ever requested?
>>BERCELI: You know,
it's kind of comical.
Because actually, while
I was in Maryknoll
is when I first heard about
the CIA could be looking
for recruiting Maryknollers.
And this was really interesting.
Because we were at such
a grassroots level,
we actually knew what was
going on in the culture better
than the CIA did.
Because we were really connected
to the culture of people.
>>REGINA: Which makes
sense why it would
be a great place to recruit.
>>BERCELI: Absolutely.
So I had friends,
colleagues of mine,
in Maryknoll who said
that they felt they were
being recruited by CIA people.
Or CIA people were kind
of hanging around them
asking certain questions.
I never had that happen to me.
But the point about
it is that Maryknoll
had such a deep
social conscious,
and we were so truly
dedicated to helping
the poverty-stricken or
poor people of the countries
or the disenfranchised
people that we
had no investment at
all in helping the US
government in any way.
Because usually we
already knew it--
they were the ones
that were facilitating
either the bad
regime or the poverty
or the economic imbalance
in the countries.
>>REGINA: And you guys
were aware of that.
>>BERCELI: We were
very aware of it.
We knew what US policies were.
And so, we knew the US
policies were actually
the policies that were
causing the problems
in the countries themselves.
Because we were both Americans
and well-educated Americans
and quite informed,
but we were also
very well-informed of the
poverty and the violence
that the people were living
in in these countries
we worked in.
So we had, actually,
information from both sides.
And once you had
that, it's very easy
to choose who were the victims.
And so, we chose to
help the victims.
>>REGINA: So your
particular area
wasn't necessarily fertile
ground for recruiting assets
or agents.
>>BERCELI: No, no, no.
We weren't actually.
Now, they tried.
But it was very clear
that it was unsuccessful.
Because we really knew--
well, Maryknollers
are very well-educated and
very well-informed people.
So we knew what was going on.
We knew the reality of things.
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm, so now in
the midst of all of this--
we're going to
get to the methods
that you use in a little
bit-- but since this
is going into the
subconscious, since this
is in the nervous system, in the
body itself, in the musculature
and so forth, is there a
place for psychotherapy
within all of this?
>>BERCELI: Yeah.
Let me just summarize very
quickly-- whenever a person is
traumatized, from
what I can see,
it has actually three
different effects on them.
It affects their
psycho-emotional state.
And so, that would
affect relationship.
But it also affects
them physically.
And we can talk about that--
>>REGINA: We're going to, yes.
>>BERCELI: --a little
bit more later on.
So now, we're talking about
psycho-emotional, the body,
and-- this seems to be
really primary-- it actually
affects their belief system.
Now, I don't use the word
religion or spirituality.
>>REGINA: Explain
this a little bit.
Yeah.
>>BERCELI: Belief
system is you understand
your way of being on this planet
in whatever way makes sense
to you, OK?
So that could be a religion.
That could be a
general spirituality.
I believe in the
cosmos, or I believe
in the universe, or a higher
consciousness, et cetera.
But I'm not a Catholic,
or a Protestant,
or Buddhist, or
Muslim, whatever.
That would be religion.
A belief system includes
atheists and agnostics.
Because I have been
in many situations
where I have people
from many religions,
many belief systems, and
atheists and agnostics
traumatized.
And it's astonishing
how our brain
has to try to figure out how to
make sense again of something
that was completely senseless.
We have to put pieces
back together that
restore some sense of
solidity for us to say, OK.
I've made sense of it.
Even if it means--
and this is very often
the case-- people who are
very religious or spiritual
leave and say, I'm an atheist.
I don't believe in
God, and da-da-da.
But that new belief
system now helps
them make sense of the
experience they went through.
The opposite could be true.
Atheists and agnostics
could all of a sudden say,
I believe in God now.
I pray every day in church or
synagogue or wherever I pray.
Because they made
this radical shift.
But it was the trauma--
>>REGINA: It could be something
like, why was my life spared
and all my buddies were killed?
>>BERCELI: Exactly
right, survivor guilt.
So it fractures
the belief system
they had before the trauma.
And I discovered that a
lot of suicidal ideation
occurs when they can't
rebuild a new belief system.
They can't make sense of
what's going on on the planet.
And it's so confusing and
disturbing that it actually
drives them out of their mind.
So here's what I think happens.
In some way, every human
being who recovers from trauma
hits all three of those points.
They may do
psycho-emotional stuff,
but they might do it with
their spouse or their partner
in a relationship, not
necessarily go to a therapist.
They may go to a gym, or go
to spas, or start taking yoga.
But they're finding some way
to address the disturbance
in the body, physiologically.
And then, they do
something about talking
with their buddies or their
friends or their colleagues,
asking, why am I still alive?
Why did this happen?
And that's questioning
the belief system again.
And so, every human person I've
ever seen all over the world
will try to restore all three
of those sections of being
human as a way of recovering
from the traumatic experience.
>>REGINA: Right.
Let's talk about the
notion of resistance, OK?
Because this factors pretty
big time into your work.
>>BERCELI: Right.
>>REGINA: Because you're
saying, essentially,
resistance is futile.
>>BERCELI: Mm-hmm, right.
Yes.
>>REGINA: So talk about it
in a more holistic level
than what I just said.
>>BERCELI: Right.
OK, so just think
of it this way.
Resistance-- which
I truly respect.
Whether I'm doing
counseling with somebody,
or body work with them, or
even spiritual direction,
and I see that we hit a place
of resistance-- they can't
go there, they don't want
to open that up, they
don't want to talk about it or
feel it-- I truly respect it.
Because what they're saying
is, I'm not safe enough.
Resistance just means,
I'm not feeling safe.
Trauma destroyed the safety.
So in terms of helping
the individual to recover,
I can only go as fast
as they possibly can go.
And each individual is
different about that.
Some people can go
psycho-emotionally
faster than they can go
physically or spiritually,
et cetera.
So resistance is, basically,
the individual saying,
I can't go deeper.
I can't go faster.
It terrifies me.
I don't want to do
it, and I won't.
Now, that's great for me,
in the sense of saying,
OK, there's the boundary.
And I'll look at and
say, OK, there it is.
That's the boundary
and that's fine.
And you hold onto that
as long as you need to.
However, be careful that
your resistance doesn't
begin to try to manifest
itself in disturbing ways,
like violent manners.
I'm resistant.
I won't believe in God!
Or I won't let go of my faith!
And you have to
pray the way I pray!
And you have to believe in my
god the way I believe in it,
or you're going to go to hell!
That is the manifestation
of a resistance that's
seeking expression in some way.
But it's not the person
being able to let go
and giving in to-- in a
sense-- rebuilding themselves
into a healthy state.
>>REGINA: And I
think all of us can
relate to knowing where we have
our own resistance in life.
>>BERCELI: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And maybe give
us a couple of examples
that are interesting or
startling, in terms of the way
the resistance actually started
subverting their own lives
and expressing itself
in, maybe, strange ways.
In a couple of examples.
>>BERCELI: Well, we see
resistance in relationships,
in families, all the time.
So the husband and
wife-- one of them
will meet resistance
about growth
that the other one
insists they must do.
OK?
And so, what that
generally does is
it causes a split in the
relationship that then gets
taken out with the children.
So the mother will try to
get the children to like
her better.
Or the father will
try to get the--
>>REGINA: Manipulation.
>>BERCELI: Exactly.
They'll manipulate the
family dynamics as a way
of-- in a sense, if
you're resistant,
you're going to try to gather
people who are going to be
like-minded to you
and say, therefore--
>>REGINA: To support you, yeah.
>>BERCELI: --my
resistance is right.
Look, these other 10 people
believe in my resistance.
So resistance in family
happens all the time
in the growth process, see.
And children know how
to do this real well.
See, teenagers
will resist growth,
which is part of
their teenage process.
But then, they'll manipulate
the parents against each other.
So we have that all the
time in family structure
in our society.
It usually manifests
in manipulation
of one form or another.
>>REGINA: So let's talk
about in the natural world.
If we weren't being
conditioned, if we weren't being
macho and proud and
all these other things
and trying to cowboy it up,
what does trauma look like raw?
--in terms of our
natural instincts
to allow it to start healing.
>>BERCELI: Mm-hmm.
If we were in a
comfortable world
and we were traumatized--
as an example--
there would be a whole
social structure available.
People would allow the
traumatized individuals to move
and flow in and out of
the social structure
and in and out of relationship.
And I'd see this in villages
a lot when I worked in Sudan.
>>REGINA: Tell us about that.
>>BERCELI: When we were able
to identify the children that
had been severely traumatized
because their parents were
killed in the last bombing
or something like that--
but when the whole village
of 150 people knew it,
those children were allowed
to go from family to family,
from children to children,
from mother to mother.
So they actually became,
in a sense, inherited
by the entire social structure.
And that allowed the child to
be resistant to one woman who
was acting as their mother
and go to another woman
and, then, go to another woman.
And so then, it allowed them to
play back and forth until they
could realize the new
social structure was safe,
and they could let go of feeling
unsafe because they had just
lost their parents.
And it's amazing
how well it works.
My first time to see
this was in Ethiopia.
And there was this severe
bombing that had just happened.
And I was wondering, how
are the Ethiopians going
to deal with this?
Because they don't have
psychotherapy in their culture,
in general.
And so one day-- it was the
next morning after the bombing--
we were sitting there.
And the women all came out.
And they were making the
fire to make the coffee.
Because they have
coffee in the morning.
But it's about a
two-hour process.
Good coffee, but it
takes a while to get it.
Whereas, I'm ready
for it in 30 seconds.
Anyways, they're
making the fire.
They're cooking the thing.
But while they're
doing this, the women
are just casually talking.
Did you hear what
happened to so-and-so?
Their child was killed.
Or the husband was killed,
and now those poor children
don't have a father.
We're going to have
to do something.
So I want you to
bake this thing.
And I want you to do that.
And we're going to have
to take the children away.
And somebody's going to
go talk to the mother.
They were actually doing a
socialized, psychotherapeutic
intervention for this family.
But they weren't
calling it that.
It was just a natural human
relationship of saying,
how are we going to care
for this family that
was just injured?
And it was beautiful.
And it dawned on me.
It's like, oh my god,
we know psychotherapy.
We know psychosocial
interventions.
By our nature, we know them.
We've made it a profession
in the Western world.
But in Ethiopia, it
was just normal life.
And that was completely
beautiful to me.
>>REGINA: That is beautiful.
Now, what about with children?
>>BERCELI: Children
will usually withdraw.
Because trauma makes
us feel unsafe.
So it's the first
thing that happens.
I don't feel safe.
And depending on
what the trauma is--
whether it was
physical abuse or it
was the parents were
killed in a car accident,
those are two different things.
However, the child
will still withdraw.
Because their whole world has
just, basically, collapsed.
And so, they deal with
trauma mostly by withdrawing.
And then, the
withdrawing actually
becomes an aggressive
behavior of some sort.
So they'll either
withdraw very deeply
and then go into music
or art or some type
of expression that allows them
to give expression to something
they're doing,
depending on their age.
Or you may see them start acting
out in aggressive manners.
The acting out is an attempt
to restore relationship.
But it's like, I want
to restore relationship
but I don't feel safe.
So they both push you away
and pull you towards them
at the same time.
It's a really complicated thing
for children to deal with.
>>REGINA: And now, I remember
when we spoke years ago.
And then, also, it's
just trickling in.
I think it's when I
interviewed Lee Gerdes.
>>BERCELI: Mm-hmm.
>>REGINA: He was
telling me a story.
I believe it was about
his son Peter, who
had been threatened in a bar
fight and what happened to him.
Now, this starts
getting a little closer
to the bone of your work.
>>BERCELI: Right.
>>REGINA: Let's talk about this.
>>BERCELI: OK.
All right, so let me tell you
a little story before that.
>>REGINA: Yes, please.
>>BERCELI: And then,
we'll tap right into that.
People ask me all the time,
how do you define trauma?
And I don't define it
in the clinical terms.
And I'm not saying
they're wrong.
I'm saying I think there's a
much more primitive, basic way
to define if you're
experiencing trauma.
And that allows it to be
individualized to everybody.
When we have a
experience of trauma
or even stress, what happens
to the human organism,
the only thing it can do
to protect itself is it
begins to squeeze.
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm, contract.
>>BERCELI: Exactly.
It contracts itself.
And it's no different than a
turtle going into its shell.
Our body contracts when
it feels under threat.
And you'll know that
mostly by if you
had a tough day at the office,
and you come back and you say,
my neck is tight.
My shoulders are tight.
I can't breathe deep.
My diaphragm's tight.
What happened?
The human organism contracts
when it feels under threat,
whether that's mild
stress or severe trauma.
What should happen
after the threat is over
is the human organism should
go back into its relaxed state
and start pulsating again,
breathing, and feeling relaxed
and shoulders dropped.
But that doesn't happen.
We stay in this
contracted state even
after the traumatic
experience is over.
And then, we end
up living in it.
Well, one of the
things that I teach
and one of the things I
discovered quite by accident--
again, living in Beirut-- was
that after the traumatic event
is over-- and you see
this all over the world,
every human organism does it.
After a person is traumatized,
they'll end up shaking.
And their jaw might shake or
even their face might shake.
And their hands are shaking.
And they say, oh my god.
I'm so nervous, I'm shaking.
I have to sit down.
And the shaking is the
nervous system's response
to the contraction.
So it squeezes like this.
And the way it gets itself
out of that contracted state
is it truly shakes itself.
So I developed a
method where you
could do exercises to
actually activate the shaking
mechanism in the nervous system
which is very easy to do,
to actually, finally, bring
to completion the contraction
that the body never let go
of after the traumatic event.
So now, we go back to Peter.
>>REGINA: Peter, yeah.
>>BERCELI: Peter's in a bar.
I was teaching Peter
these exercises.
And he's a big man.
>>REGINA: A handsome young man.
>>BERCELI: Handsome, massive,
broad shoulders, tall guy.
And I was teaching
him these exercises
and explaining to
him, the next time
you're in trauma or
any type of threat,
your body is going to squeeze.
But immediately afterwards, it's
going to start to shake itself.
And that's going to be
a healthy up and down
of the nervous system.
So he says yes, yes, yes.
And about a month later after
I was teaching him this stuff--
and he had been doing the
exercises quite regularly--
he goes to a bar.
He's with his girlfriend.
And some guy comes and
either tries to hit on her
or-- he gets into some sort
of brawl with this guy.
And the guy's a short
guy, and Peter's huge.
And he said, the guy's
shouting at Peter.
Peter's shouting back.
And Peter said, all of a sudden,
my whole body started to shake.
He said, and the guy got
scared because I was shaking
and he didn't know
what was going on.
>>REGINA: He thought he was
having a seizure or something.
>>BERCELI: And he said, it
just completely undid me.
He said, because I wanted to
be this strong, masculine guy.
I said, you were a
strong masculine guy.
You stayed healthy.
Look, after that was over, you
came out of there feeling good.
He went out of
their staying mad.
But Peter didn't.
Peter was able to release
it and move on with life.
It was just an episode of life.
So it was great.
>>REGINA: [LAUGHS] It's
interesting though because most
guys would not allow that to--
>>BERCELI: Oh they hate that!
>>REGINA: --express itself.
Had he not been doing
the exercises, right?
>>BERCELI: Exactly.
But that's the funny
thing with soldiers.
I work with a lot of Special
Forces, Delta people, Navy
Seals, Marines.
I was just talking to one
before I came here to see you.
And they think this is the
wildest, weirdest thing
they've ever done.
But they love it
because it works.
And the reason they love it--
because this is their challenge
all the time to me-- you
make something happen
in me that I can't control.
That's their big thing.
Because their
whole thing is they
spend their whole
professional learning
how to control themselves.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>BERCELI: And this
tremor mechanism
is pretty easy to activate
which they don't know.
And if I can override them
and actually get their body
to do something that they
don't have control over,
they're hooked on it.
Because they're intrigued
by it, first of all,
but it immediately relaxes them.
They fall asleep that night.
They sleep really deeply.
Because I took these
contracted states and in 15,
20 minutes got really deep,
internal relaxation to occur.
>>REGINA: Now, you used to
deal with whole groups of them,
right?
>>BERCELI: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah.
>>REGINA: When they'd
get off the plane
and they were being
reestablished into culture,
they dealt with
you first, right?
>>BERCELI: Yes, a lot of
places-- and now, it's
all over the world.
I work with military
Even in Austria,
they have five people
in the upper echelon,
colonels, being
trained to teach this to all
of their military personnel.
>>REGINA: Wow, yeah.
>>BERCELI: Because they
found it so useful for them.
So anyways, what happens is
when the soldiers come back--
it's usually between
four to six weeks.
Because when they first come
back, they hug their family.
They relax.
They go to barbecues,
have beers, and come back
into society.
But once they start
to let go, that's
when the unresolved nervous
system says, oh this
is wonderful.
We're safe.
Let me express all
this stuff I've
been holding in for two years.
>>REGINA: And so it--
>>BERCELI: So this
starts to come out.
>>REGINA: --comes out in all
these different, odd ways.
>>BERCELI: Exactly right.
And if I can get
them at that moment
when it really starts to surface
and teach them how to do this,
they can let it seep out
little by little by little
until the whole
nervous system learns
how to re-regulate itself.
And it truly is unconscious.
I have them do it while they
watch a football game on TV.
Because I just want
them to not even
pay attention to the shaking
that the body is doing.
Just lay on the floor.
Let the body shake.
It's your autonomic
nervous system.
You don't control it anyways.
Watch a football game.
Enjoy it.
And that drives them into
really deep, relaxed state.
>>REGINA: Is there
some mental resistance
because they're out of control?
>>BERCELI: Oh absolutely.
And I love it though.
Because I joke and
I play with it.
If I can get them to see, OK
look, you guys understand,
when you come back and you
clean your weapons-- right?--
you're done.
You make sure that weapon
is completely clean.
Because you're going to
be preparing yourself
for the next time
you need to do it.
Well, what about your body?
That's as much a weapon
as your gun may be
or your rifle may be.
And you've got to completely
clean that thing out and make
sure that you are
able to go back
into another
situation of violence.
And I said, if you
don't clean it out--
and this is what's
happening to soldiers--
is you just build on top
and on top and on top
until, now, you start
wearing the system down.
Because resiliency-- which is
a big word in the military--
isn't that I can contract up
and be strong when I need to be.
Resiliency is I can contract up
and be strong and then let go
and be relaxed and sleep
at night; and then,
the next day contract
up again; and then,
go home and sleep at night.
But we're not building
resiliency in soldiers.
We're actually
destroying it in a sense.
We're teaching them how to
stay built up so they're not
sleeping at night.
And they need sleep
to renew themselves.
>>REGINA: Thus very
high suicide rates too.
>>BERCELI: So we're
burning them out.
Exactly right.
So we taught them to do this.
And we didn't teach them to
do this as part of resiliency,
as the full cycle of resiliency.
>>REGINA: OK, so we're going
to take a look at a video that
shows the process.
And is there anything
you want to do
by way of setting this
up before we show this?
We're going to take a few
minutes-- five, six minutes--
and show the process.
OK?
>>BERCELI: Right.
OK.
So here's what happens.
When we're working with
traumatized people,
we have to do very simple,
gentle exercises with them.
And the exercises are only
designed to stretch the muscles
and slightly fatigue them.
That's all.
It's not about building muscle,
bulk, or anything like that
and no heavy-duty workout.
Because all I'm trying to
do is take the person out
of their commonly rigid
stance and starting
to flex it a little bit.
Because that's all it needs
for that nervous system
to activate the
shaking mechanism.
It has to come out
of its rigidity.
So the exercises are very simple
to get it out of the rigidity.
So once that happens, then
they can lay on the floor.
And in the last exercise, they
activate the nervous system.
All it does is cause
muscle to pulsate, see?
And the pulsating is
a real rapid response.
And so, it becomes
like twitching
or tremoring or shaking.
That's how they experience it.
And there's a conflict.
They feel it both pleasurable
and weird at the same time.
>>REGINA: Right.
And is that what
you're going to show?
We're going to see that?
>>BERCELI: Yeah.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>BERCELI: OK.
And so, the thing about
that, what's really cool,
is that once it
activates, they don't
have to consciously
reflect on it at all.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
NARRATOR>>After prolonged
stress or traumatic events,
or even a bad day, fear, anger,
and stress can become chronic
muscular tension
patterns in the body.
TRE is an innovative
physical technique
that enables the body
to naturally shake away
stress, safely unwind
buried tension while calming
the nervous system.
All this activated in an
intentional and controlled
manner.
As seen in the animal
kingdom, mammals
employ a tremor-like shaking
reflex to quickly calm down
the nervous system
after escaping
from perceived or real threats
or excessive excitement.
Many of us have
seen dogs or felt
dog shaking to calm themselves.
Much like a
pressure-release valve,
this same tension-releasing
mechanism exists in humans.
But culturally, we have
learned to suppress or override
this response.
Until now, it has not
been well-studied or
well-understood.
Dr. David Berceli, while working
in trauma and stress recovery
in war-torn areas, recognized
the healing potential
of this reflex for relieving
traumatic and chronic stress.
He developed TRE as a reliable
series of simple exercises
to help individuals activate
this reflex response
and to sustain it comfortably.
Dr. Berceli understood
an important paradox.
This tremor-like or
shaking reflex-- although
of an involuntary origin--
can be activated deliberately
to unwind muscle tension,
while calming and balancing
the nervous system.
When initiated in a safe
and controlled environment,
reflexive muscle vibration,
shaking, or tremoring
can feel remarkably effortless,
pleasant, and soothing.
Many people report feelings of
relief from deep-rooted stress
and tension that sometimes
cannot be achieved through
other methods such as
physical exercise, meditation,
or talk therapy.
Initially, simple
gentle exercises
will stretch specific
core muscles.
And then, a natural
tension-releasing reflex
can be intentionally initiated.
This mechanism creates
therapeutic muscle tremors
that can relieve tension
and be self-soothing.
With practice, these
therapeutic tremors
can be activated easily
and almost spontaneously.
With practice and
periodic use, most people
report that TRE helps release
deep-rooted tension, stress,
and trauma.
In many cases, they
have experienced results
that are often quite profound.
By simply adjusting
the leg positions,
the progression can easily
be paced and controlled.
Although TRE can look
strange, the reflex mechanism
allows the body to unwind
trapped muscle tension
and to calm itself
naturally, without words
or conscious effort.
TRE can be taught in
groups or individually.
Our ability to shake
off stress, including
unconscious traumatic stress,
may be hardwired in our brain.
Our capacity to be calmed by
rhythmic motion or vibration
can be observed even from birth.
Without any prompting,
parents seem
to know intuitively that
a gentle, bouncing motion
before rocking will lull an
infant into a calmer, relaxed
state.
A few of the reported
benefits are better sleep
and clearer thinking, reduced
levels of stress and anxiety,
reduced muscle tension and back
pain, reduced levels of worry
when burdened by
chronic illness,
reduced anger and reduced
over-reactivity, better
relationships both with
coworkers and family, greater
resiliency and
feelings of optimism.
The scientific nature
and healing potential
of this tension-releasing
mechanism
is only partially understood.
More research is
needed and continues.
The Department of
Defense DCOE lists
TRE as a level III modality.
Evidence-based pilot
research projects
are underway in Europe, South
Africa, and North America.
Increasingly, TRE is
used by professionals
as a complementary intervention
to help restore balance
and optimism for those
dealing with the effects
of traumatic stress.
It is also being used
by thousands of people
around the world
as a self-help tool
to relieve stress and
tension, to sleep better,
or simply to feel good.
TRE has spread by
word-of-mouth and is now being
taught in over 35 countries.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[END PLAYBACK]
>>REGINA: So let's
talk about that.
I mean, animals,
the animal kingdom,
does this quite naturally.
>>BERCELI: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Because they don't
have the mental resistance
that we have.
>>BERCELI: Right.
Peter Levine was one of the
people who first really, sort
of, brought this to
our social conscious--
is that animals
naturally tremor.
You can see your dog tremoring
during a thunderstorm
or after they've
been in an accident.
If you see a horse
fall, when it gets up,
it shakes all over its body.
It may tremor even for half
an hour, as an example.
Animals don't have the
blockage that we have.
They're more instinctual.
And so what happens when an
animal injures itself or it get
anxious or nervous,
it automatically
begins to tremor
all over the body.
And that's actually the
nervous system trying
to calm down the organism.
And as a result of
that, there's a book
called "Why Zebras
Don't get Ulcers."
And that's because they
complete the cycle.
Animals live in life-or-death
threats in the wild every day.
But they don't have Post
Traumatic Stress Disorder.
See, only humans have that one.
And some domesticated
animals demonstrate
Post Traumatic Stress Disorder
but not animals in the wild.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
Because they're too tied
to the human species.
>>BERCELI: Exactly right.
Exactly right,
and we limit them.
But in our natural
state, the nervous system
would become aroused
during the traumatic event.
After the traumatic
event is over,
the body begins
to tremor itself.
It brings yourself back into
a para-sympathetic response,
and it's over.
>>REGINA: So we're seeing it
as it should be in nature.
>>BERCELI: Mm-hmm.
>>REGINA: Now, particularly
vulnerable groups--
aside from people coming
back from war situations--
are women and children.
>>BERCELI: Right.
>>REGINA: And that's
true globally.
>>BERCELI: Right, absolutely.
Yeah.
Now, what I do--
which is really great.
And this is women and children
just in life in general,
in our society actually.
And mothers in particular
who are single mothers that
have several children--
they're highly stressed lives.
I teach mothers all the time
how to do this for themselves
first.
Because every child is
regulating, unconsciously,
to the mother's nervous system.
All the children from very
young aged into teenage
know when the mother is upset.
And it's not the face
or the eyes or anything.
It's picking up on
the nervous system.
Because all our nervous
systems generally
regulate towards each other.
It's a safety thing
that happens to us
unconsciously to test
out whether there's
safety or danger here.
And so, mothers need to calm
down first and get themselves
in a state of homeostasis
or more calmness.
And the children will
automatically follow them, see?
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm.
>>BERCELI: But then the
mothers, they're great.
If they have a good relationship
with their children--
I teach this to mothers all the
time-- they lay on the floor.
They play with the children.
They do shake
together all the time.
The children laugh and giggle.
And it becomes a playful event.
>>REGINA: Yeah,
what a wonderful--
>>BERCELI: And the
children love it.
It makes them feel better.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
We just have a
minute or so left.
Let's talk about forgiveness
and how forgiveness
plays into all of this.
>>BERCELI: OK.
Forgiveness is a very
complicated thing.
Because some traumas
are vindictive.
If somebody beats you
up, different from you're
in an earthquake where it's
from God or whatever, nature,
that sort of thing.
And so, that plays
a role in about how
we're able to forgive.
Do I have to forgive God?
Or do I have to forgive you?
Or do I have to
forgive my spouse?
--or et cetera.
Forgiveness, at its deepest
level-- I truly believe,
when people have
gone through trauma
and really tried
to resolve it-- is
we end up forgiving us
that we are this way.
It's not a vindictive
directed thing.
And it's not, you
have to forgive me.
Or I have to forgive you.
We have to experience
that we as a human species
have to forgive ourselves
for being the way we are.
And that is the most
profound level of forgiveness
I think I've ever seen.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
And finally, is it
advisable then--
I mean, it sounds
like it for, really,
pretty much anybody that's
living in the modern world.
Because we are being conditioned
towards stress and trauma
all the time, subconsciously,
and as you said,
we're doing it to ourselves.
Aside from removing
ourselves and going back
to the land and such-- which
people are doing-- turning off
the TV, et cetera, is it
good for us in general
to start doing the TRE exercises
together or alone even?
>>BERCELI: I think it's
absolutely essential,
personally.
And the reason I say that
is because if it's still
built into our
nervous system, then
as part of our
evolutionary process,
our nervous system
must still think we
need that to actually survive.
So I think every
human person, just
as they know how to
tense themselves,
should know how to release that
tension through this tremor
mechanism.
So I think it's actually
organic in the human body.
>>REGINA: I know one
guy who does the method
before going out on dates.
>>BERCELI: Yeah!
>>REGINA: Because he has
a little fear built up--
>>BERCELI: There you go!
Exactly right.
>>REGINA: --over rejections
of the past and tensing
up and who knows what's
going to play out.
And that's how he
relaxes himself--
>>BERCELI: Perfect.
>>REGINA: --to be a good
companion on a date.
>>BERCELI: Yeah, I
think it's perfect.
And it's probably helping him.
>>REGINA: It definitely is.
David, fabulous work.
Thank you so much
for joining us.
>>BERCELI: Thank you, Regina.
What a joy.
>>REGINA: Again, the
title of David's book
is "The Revolutionary
Trauma Release Process."
Time to shake it off.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Gaiam TV.
[MUSIC PLAYING]